# Internationalization

Chameleon uses the symfony translation service ('translator'). Bundle translations are stored as xlf in the Bundle under Resources/translations. Backend translations use the domain 'admin' while frontend translations are placed in the messages domain.

In twig templates, you can use the symfony translation tags and filters

Some things to note:

- Chameleon currently uses the language as locale.
- The frontend and backend domains are provided as constants via ChameleonSystem\CoreBundle\i18n\TranslationConstants. For backend translations, be sure to always set the domain
- TGlobal::Translate is deprecated and should not be used - it is important to note however, that TGlobal::Translate automatically sets the translation domain based on the cms mode.

## System-Details

The translation language is taken from the request. For Chameleon the request object has been overwritten so as to
* use the cms user language id in backend mode
* and the language from the request itself in frontend mode.

For the frontend Mode, there is a service (chameleon_system_core.language_service) that is used to change the frontend language. That service will trigger a LocaleChangedEvent whenever it is used to change the locale. An event listener (chameleon_system_core.change_translation_locale_listener) will use that event to also switch the locale of the translator.

So: to get the active locale, just use the request object in both frontend and backend mode

## Translations in Javascript (backend)

Backend strings can be translated using CHAMELEON.CORE.i18n.Translate(). To make a translation string available, you need to put it into the js backend domain defined via TranslationConstants::DOMAIN_BACKEND_JS.

The translation strings are made available via the route_backend_js_translation_database route (/api/admin-js-translation-db/{locale})

## Translation of enum fields

The cms will try to find a translation for every enum value in the TranslationConstants::DOMAIN_BACKEND_ENUM domain when displaying the enum field in the backend using the following key format:

table.field.value

If the translation is not found, then the enum value will be returned.